Document `docs/reference` shortcode (#264)
grafana/writers-toolkit: docs/sources/writing-guide/shortcodes/index.md

{{</* section withDescriptions="true"*/>}}
```

## `docs/reference` shortcode

The `docs/reference` shortcode offers more flexible linking than the Hugo builtin `relref` shortcode.

> Reference links wrapped in the `docs/reference` shortcode can be defined with multiple destinations.

Reviewer: Second having these examples here to spell out the use case.

> Reference links wrapped in the `docs/reference` shortcode can be defined with multiple destinations.

Author: Added in f4cd5f0.

> The destination used in a the rendered page depends is chosen based upon matching path prefixes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The destination used in a rendered page derives from matching path prefixes.
```

```markdown
{{%/* docs/reference */%}}

> [<LABEL>]: "<PATH PREFIX> -> <REFERENCE>"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[<LABEL>]: "<PROJECT PATH PREFIX> -> <REFERENCE>"
```
I think you mean to add `PROJECT ` in here.

...
{{%/* /docs/reference */%}}
```

- _`LABEL`_ matches a link label used in a reference-style link (`[LINK TEXT][LABEL])`).
  For more information about reference-style links, refer to [Daring Fireball: Markdown Syntax Documentation](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link).

> - _`PROJECT PATH PREFIX`_ is matched against the page’s URL path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _`PROJECT PATH PREFIX`_ is matches the page’s URL path.
```

Author: I feel "is matched against" is more clear because there is a selection process where only the first matching _`PROJECT PATH PREFIX`_ is chosen.

- _`REFERENCE`_ is the parameter that would typically be used in a `relref` shortcode.

>   It can include the special syntax `<SOMETHING VERSION>` which is first looked up in the front matter before falling back to the version inferred from the page's version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  It can include the syntax `<SOMETHING VERSION>`, which is first looked up in the front matter before falling back to the version inferred from the page's version.
```
I start to wonder why this is "special", and doing so is not likely important.

Author: Good point, it's not really special. I think in my head I was distinguishing the syntax from a general variable substitution. It's very specifically only for version substitution.

Reviewer 2: I think "before falling" --> "before the reference falls back ..." or "before the version falls back ..."? still needs clarification.

Author: What about:

> It can include the syntax `<SOMETHING VERSION>`, which is replaced by the value of the front matter `something_version` if present, or to the version inferred from the page.

>   It can include the syntax `<SOMETHING VERSION>`, which is first looked up in the front matter before falling back to the version inferred from the page's version.

Reviewer: So this explains what the system is doing with these, but could we instead explain them like what you the writer need to enter. Not exactly as below (I can clean it up if we like this approach, but something similar):

LABEL - The link text
PROJECT PREFIX PATH - The project of the destinations where you want the link to be usable, for example, for grafana, /docs/grafana/, for mimir, /docs/mimir/
REFERENCE - Seems like this is a partial URL (per what we say in our links content currently in the Writer's Toolkit) and not what we use in relrefs?

Author: Good point, it perhaps needs tuning to be better understood by TWs.

I really like the solution focused explanation of _`PROJECT PREFIX PATH`_

_`LABEL`_ is not link text but what is called a label in the section about reference-style links from the Markdown author: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link. 
Multiple links in a document can use different link text but the same label. That label is resolved once elsewhere in the file, typically at the top or the bottom. Kind of like footnotes.

_`REFERENCE`_ is actually the exact parameter that would be passed to a relref but with the additional version variable substitution. You can actually use absolute paths in relrefs but we have avoided them in versioned documentation because we would need to update the version in each branch of documentation (latest -> v9.5.x once it's no longer latest, etc.). The version variable in the shortcode removes that concern and lets us use those more readable absolute paths.

Author: Updated in 237ca9d

### Example

```markdown
{{%/* docs/reference */%}}
[grafana]: "/docs/grafana/ -> /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>"
[grafana]: "/docs/grafana-cloud/ -> /docs/grafana-cloud"
[grafana]: "/docs/mimir/ -> /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>"
{{%/* /docs/reference */%}}

> ```

Author: I definitely need to rewrite this section because I think the behavior is currently easy to misundersand.

Although your understanding is close, the explanation in your comment does not match the behavior of the example usage.

Assuming the reference-style link:

```markdown
For more information about Grafana dashboards, refer to [Dashboards][dashboards].
```

The shortcode that would match your explanation would be:

```
{{% docs/reference %}}
[dashboards]: "/docs/grafana/ -> /docs/grafana/latest/dashboards"
[dashboards]: "/docs/grafana-cloud/ -> /docs/grafana/latest/dashboards"
[dashboards]: "/docs/mimir/ -> /docs/grafana/latest/dashboards"
{{% /docs/reference %}}
```

Since there is no contextual destination, we don't even need this shortcode for the preceding example, and can just use:

```markdown
For more information about Grafana dashboards, refer to [Dashboards]({{< relref "/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards" >}}).
```

One problem with linking the in the preceding example is that we don't usually want to link to `latest` but instead to the current version of documentation.
We don't want `/docs/grafana/next/` content linking to `/docs/grafana/latest/`.

That's where the version variable `<GRAFANA VERSION>` comes in.

Now the same shortcode but with version interpolation:

```markdown
{{% docs/reference %}}
[dashboards]: "/docs/grafana/ -> /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/dashboards"
[dashboards]: "/docs/grafana-cloud/ -> /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/dashboards"
[dashboards]: "/docs/mimir/ -> /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/dashboards"
{{% /docs/reference %}}
```

Now the front matter `grafana_version` will affect the reference.
If the front matter `grafana_version` is not present, then the version is inferred from the page's version.

1. If the shortcode is rendered in the page `/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/`, **without the** front matter `grafana_version`, the reference used would become `/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards`.
1. If the shortcode is rendered in the page `/docs/grafana-cloud/alerting/`, **with** the front matter `grafana_version: next`, the reference used would become
`/docs/grafana/next/dashboards`.

Does this explain things more clearly?

> ```

Reviewer: My example isn't relevant as anything besides a guide for the kind of example I'm looking for to ensure I can set one of these up. Having a for-example would just be helpful to me if I understand the scenario and the intended outcome and it uses the version variable. I think the part of your explanation where you actually show how you use the label in the context of some text is **essential** for understanding how to use these.

I've added some comments to try to clarify what I think the meanings are for each part of the setup.  But I'm still not clear on the what I need to enter for the GRAFANA VERSION variable? Nothing? Am I just letting the the system sort that out unless I have a reason to point to some specific version?

> ```

Author: Yes the `<SOMETHING VERSION>` variable syntax is interpolated by the shortcode. 

It is currently documented in https://github.com/grafana/writers-toolkit/pull/264/files#diff-bdc57a00bf7e2ae51ef4333951207adc6f3b3fd4d36ffe7389a5222f1591152cR171

and updated verbiage is proposed in https://github.com/grafana/writers-toolkit/pull/264#discussion_r1230807343

> ```

Author: > My example isn't relevant as anything besides a guide for the kind of example I'm looking for to ensure I can set one of these up.

My bad, I assumed because of the similar content that your example was a reinterpretation of the existing example.

> ```

Author: I've tried writing more concrete examples in https://github.com/grafana/writers-toolkit/pull/264/commits/1f92907c3f0198f74045d74c4cd845db0f9b93d2

1. If the shortcode is rendered in a page that has the path prefix `/docs/grafana/`, the shortcode returns a relref to `/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>`.
1. If the shortcode is rendered in a page that has the path prefix `/docs/grafana-cloud/`, the shortcode returns a relref to `/docs/grafana-cloud`.
1. If the shortcode is rendered in a page that has the path prefix `/docs/mimir/`, the shortcode returns a relref to `/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>`.

> In cases 1. and 3. the "version" variable `<GRAFANA VERSION>` is replaced with the value of the front matter `grafana_version` if present, or by the version inferred from the current page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In cases 1 and 3, the variable of the product version (`<GRAFANA VERSION>`) is replaced with the value of the front matter `grafana_version` if present, or by the version inferred from the current page.
```

Reviewer 2: I would wonder more if there were quotes here. What secret meaning am I supposed to understand? Without the quotes, it seems like it is a bit more straightforward to me.

{{</* section withDescriptions="true"*/>}}
```

## `docs/reference` shortcode

The `docs/reference` shortcode offers more flexible linking than the Hugo builtin `relref` shortcode.

> If content is sourced from one location, and published in multiple locations, the `docs/reference` shortcode helps you control the appropriate link location.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When content from one repository is published to more than one documentation set, the `docs/reference` shortcode lets you specify appropriate links for each doc set.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

For example, alerting documentation is sourced from the Grafana repository and published to both Grafana documentation and Grafana Cloud documentation.

> Any link from alerting documentation to dashboard documentation, which is also published to both Grafana and Grafana Cloud, needs to be specific as to which destination is appropriate for the audience.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Any link from alerting documentation to dashboard documentation, which is also published to both Grafana and Grafana Cloud, needs to be specific as to which destination is appropriate for the product documentation.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Grafana Cloud alerting documentation should link to Grafana Cloud dashboard documentation, and Grafana alerting documentation should link to Grafana dashboard documentation.

Reviewer 3: I think this sentence should be part of the previous paragraph.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/grafana/writers-toolkit/pull/264/commits/9019ee670022e495abaa7cf055c3e3fa5e2df2d6

The destination used in a rendered page derives from matching path prefixes:

```markdown
{{%/* docs/reference */%}}
[<LABEL>]: "<PROJECT PATH PREFIX> -> <REFERENCE>"
...
{{%/* /docs/reference */%}}
```

> - _`LABEL`_ matches the link label used in a reference-style link (`[LINK TEXT][LABEL])`).
>   For more information about reference-style links, refer to [Daring Fireball: Markdown Syntax Documentation](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _`LABEL`_  - The link label used in a reference-style link (`[LINK TEXT][LABEL])`) For example, : 
`For more information about Grafana dashboards, refer to [Dashboards][dashboards].`
Multiple links in a document can use different link text but the same label. That label is resolved once elsewhere in the file, typically at the top or the bottom.
For more information about reference-style links, refer to [Daring Fireball: Markdown Syntax Documentation](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link).
```

- _`PROJECT PATH PREFIX`_ is matched against the page’s URL path, where the first matching `PROJECT PATH PREFIX` is chosen.
  The project of the destinations where you want _`REFERENCE`_ to be used.
  For example, for Grafana, use `/docs/grafana/`, for Mimir, use `/docs/mimir/`.

> - _`REFERENCE`_ is the parameter that would typically be used in a `relref` shortcode.

Author: ```suggestion
- _`REFERENCE`_ is the same parameter used in a `relref` shortcode.
```

  It can include the syntax `<SOMETHING VERSION>`, which is first looked up in the front matter before falling back to the version inferred from the page's version.

>   Any of the kinds of arguments documented in [Links and Cross References](https://gohugo.io/content-management/cross-references/#use-of-ref-and-relref) can be used.

Reviewer: I don't understand how this is what we typically use in a relref code and not a partial URL:
/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/dashboards

Author: Perhaps we should remove "typically", it's not helpful as our typical usage is probably to use relative paths to files rather than absolute-ish paths like `/docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/dashboards`.

Reviewer: I think invoking the language of relrefs here is going to be confusing for those of us who still need to look at how relrefs are formatted regularly to just make sure they work at all. Is there another word we can use instead?

Author: I don't know if I can because the destination is passed to the relref function.  I have linked to the definitive documentation for relrefs so that people can go there for more information.

I understand the Hugo docs aren't great but I feel like explaining relrefs arguments is outside of the scope of this PR.

{{</* section withDescriptions="true"*/>}}
```

## `docs/reference` shortcode

> The `docs/reference` shortcode offers more flexible linking than the Hugo builtin `relref` shortcode.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `docs/reference` shortcode offers more flexible linking than the Hugo built-in `relref` shortcode.
```

Any link from alerting documentation to dashboard documentation, which is also published to both Grafana and Grafana Cloud, needs to be specific as to which destination is appropriate for the product documentation.
Grafana Cloud alerting documentation should link to Grafana Cloud dashboard documentation, and Grafana alerting documentation should link to Grafana dashboard documentation.

The destination used in a rendered page derives from matching path prefixes:

```markdown
{{%/* docs/reference */%}}
[<LABEL>]: "<PROJECT PATH PREFIX> -> <REFERENCE>"
...
{{%/* /docs/reference */%}}
```

- _`LABEL`_ matches the link label used in a reference-style link (`[LINK TEXT][LABEL])`).
  For more information about reference-style links, refer to [Daring Fireball: Markdown Syntax Documentation](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax#link).
- _`PROJECT PATH PREFIX`_ is matched against the page’s URL path, where the first matching `PROJECT PATH PREFIX` is chosen.
  The project of the destinations where you want _`REFERENCE`_ to be used.

>   For example, for Grafana, use `/docs/grafana/`, for Mimir, use `/docs/mimir/`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  For example, for Grafana, use `/docs/grafana/`; for Mimir, use `/docs/mimir/`.
```

```markdown
For more information about Grafana dashboards, refer to [Dashboards][dashboards].
```

Version interpolation of `/docs/reference` enables the use of absolute paths that resolve correctly, irrespective of version.
In the following example, the `/docs/reference` shortcode replaces the variable `<GRAFANA VERSION>` with the version inferred from the current page.

- If the page is `/docs/grafana/latest/alerting`, the inferred version is `latest`, and the returned reference is `/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards`.
- If the page is `/docs/grafana/next/alerting`, the inferred version is `next`, and the returned reference is `/docs/grafana/next/dashboards`.

```markdown
{{%/* docs/reference */%}}
[dashboards]: "/docs/grafana/ -> /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/dashboards"
{{%/* /docs/reference */%}}
```

You can override version inference using front matter.
To override the value of `<GRAFANA VERSION>`, set the `grafana_version` parameter in the page's front matter.
For example, with the front matter `grafana_version: next`, the shortcode replaces `<GRAFANA VERSION>` with `next`.

#### Contextual destinations

> Given a page in versioned Grafana documentation containing the following the reference-style link:

Reviewer 4: I'm not following the flow of this section well. The phrase "Given a page..." seems to need a "...then this is true" conclusion, not a colon.

```markdown
For more information about Grafana dashboards, refer to [Dashboards][dashboards].
```

The page is also mounted into Grafana Cloud documentation.
The page in Grafana should link to the Grafana dashboards page and the page in Grafana Cloud should link to the Grafana Cloud dashboards page.

```markdown
{{%/* docs/reference */%}}
[dashboards]: "/docs/grafana/ -> /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA VERSION>/dashboards"
[dashboards]: "/docs/grafana-cloud/ -> /docs/grafana-cloud/dashboards"
{{%/* /docs/reference */%}}
```

## Escaping Hugo shortcodes

> If you need to display the syntax for a shortcode, you can escape it using this syntax:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you need to display the syntax for a shortcode, escape it using this syntax:
```
